Chapter 1. Introduction
=======================

Python is one of those rare languages which can claim to be both
simple and powerful. You will find that you will be pleasantly
surprised on how easy it is to concentrate on the solution to the
problem rather than the syntax and structure of the language you are
programming in.

The official introduction to Python is

    Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language. It has
    efficient high-level data structures and a simple but effective
    approach to object-oriented programming. Python's elegant syntax
    and dynamic typing, together with its interpreted nature, make it
    an ideal language for scripting and rapid application development
    in many areas on most platforms.

I will discuss most of these features in more detail in the next
section.

    Guido van Rossum, the creator of the Python language, named the
    language after the BBC show "Monty Python's Flying Circus ". He
    doesn't particularly like snakes that kill animals for food by
    winding their long bodies around them and crushing them.

Features of Python
------------------

Simple
~~~~~~

Python is a simple and minimalistic language. Reading a good
Python program feels almost like reading English, although
very strict English! This pseudo-code nature of Python is one
of its greatest strengths. It allows you to concentrate on
the solution to the problem rather than the language itself.

Easy to Learn
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As you will see, Python is extremely easy to get started
with. Python has an extraordinarily simple syntax, as already
mentioned.

Free and Open Source
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python is an example of a FLOSS (Free/Libré and Open Source
Software). In simple terms, you can freely distribute copies
of this software, read it's source code, make changes to it,
use pieces of it in new free programs, and that you know you
can do these things. FLOSS is based on the concept of a
community which shares knowledge. This is one of the reasons
why Python is so good - it has been created and is constantly
improved by a community who just want to see a better Python.

High-level Language
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you write programs in Python, you never need to bother
about the low-level details such as managing the memory used
by your program, etc.

Portable
~~~~~~~~

Due to its open-source nature, Python has been ported (i.e.
changed to make it work on) to many platforms. All your
Python programs can work on any of these platforms without
requiring any changes at all if you are careful enough to
avoid any system-dependent features.

You can use Python on Linux, Windows, FreeBSD, Macintosh,
Solaris, OS/2, Amiga, AROS, AS/400, BeOS, OS/390, z/OS, Palm
OS, QNX, VMS, Psion, Acorn RISC OS, VxWorks, PlayStation,
Sharp Zaurus, Windows CE and even PocketPC !

Interpreted
~~~~~~~~~~~

This requires a bit of explanation.

A program written in a compiled language like C or C++ is
converted from the source language i.e. C or C++ into a
language that is spoken by your computer (binary code i.e. 0s
and 1s) using a compiler with various flags and options. When
you run the program, the linker/loader software copies the
program from hard disk to memory and starts running it.

Python, on the other hand, does not need compilation to
binary. You just run the program directly from the source
code. Internally, Python converts the source code into an
intermediate form called bytecodes and then translates this
into the native language of your computer and then runs it.
All this, actually, makes using Python much easier since you
don't have to worry about compiling the program, making sure
that the proper libraries are linked and loaded, etc, etc.
This also makes your Python programs much more portable,
since you can just copy your Python program onto another
computer and it just works!

Object Oriented
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python supports procedure-oriented programming as well as
object-oriented programming. In procedure-oriented languages,
the program is built around procedures or functions which are
nothing but reusable pieces of programs. In object-oriented
languages, the program is built around objects which combine
data  and functionality. Python has a very powerful but
simplistic way of doing OOP, especially when compared to big
languages like C++ or Java.

Extensible
~~~~~~~~~~

If you need a critical piece of code to run very fast or want
to have some piece of algorithm not to be open, you can code
that part of your program in C or C++ and then use them from
your Python program.

Embeddable
~~~~~~~~~~

You can embed Python within your C/C++ programs to give
'scripting' capabilities for your program's users.

Extensive Libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Python Standard Library is huge indeed. It can help you
do   various   things  involving  regular  expressions,
documentation generation, unit testing, threading, databases,
web browsers, CGI, ftp, email, XML, XML-RPC, HTML, WAV files,
cryptography, GUI (graphical user interfaces), Tk, and other
system-dependent  stuff.  Remember,  all this is always
available wherever Python is installed. This is called the
'Batteries Included' philosophy of Python.

Besides,  the standard library, there are various other
high-quality libraries such as wxPython, Twisted, Python
Imaging Library and many more.

Summary
~~~~~~~

Python is indeed an exciting and powerful language. It has the right
combination of performance and features that make writing programs
in Python both fun and easy.

Why not Perl?
-------------

If you didn't know already, Perl is another extremely popular open
source interpreted programming language.

If you have ever tried writing a large program in Perl, you would
have answered this question yourself! In other words, Perl programs
are  easy when they are small and it excels at small hacks and
scripts to 'get work done'. However, they quickly become unwieldy
once you start writing bigger programs and I am speaking this out of
experience of writing large Perl programs at Yahoo!

When compared to Perl, Python programs are definitely simpler,
clearer,  easier  to  write  and hence more understandable and
maintainable. I do admire Perl and I do use it on a daily basis for
various  things but whenever I write a program, I always start
thinking in terms of Python because it has become so natural for me.
Perl has undergone so many hacks and changes, that it feels like it
is one big (but one hell of a) hack. Sadly, the upcoming Perl 6 does
not seem to be making any improvements regarding this.

The only and very significant advantage that I feel Perl has, is its
huge CPAN library - the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network. As the
name suggests, this is a humongous collection of Perl modules and it
is simply mind-boggling because of its sheer size and depth - you
can do virtually anything you can do with a computer using these
modules. One of the reasons that Perl has more libraries than Python
is that it has been around for a much longer time than Python. Maybe
I  should  suggest  a port-Perl-modules-to-Python hackathon on
comp.lang.python :)

Also, the new Parrot virtual machine is designed to run both the
completely redesigned Perl 6 as well as Python and other interpreted
languages like Ruby, PHP and Tcl. What this means to you is that
maybe you will be able to use all Perl modules from Python in the
future, so that will give you the best of both worlds - the powerful
CPAN library combined with the powerful Python language. However, we
will have to just wait and see what happens.

What Programmers Say
--------------------

You may find it interesting to read what great hackers like ESR have
to say about Python:
* Eric S. Raymond is the author of 'The Cathedral and the Bazaar'
and is also the person who coined the term 'Open Source'. He
says that Python has become his favorite programming language.
This article was the real inspiration for my first brush with
Python.
* Bruce Eckel is the author of the famous 'Thinking in Java' and
'Thinking in C++' books. He says that no language has made him
more productive than Python. He says that Python is perhaps the
only language that focuses on making things easier for the
programmer. Read the complete interview for more details.
* Peter Norvig is a well-known Lisp author and Director of Search
Quality at Google (thanks to Guido van Rossum for pointing that
out). He says that Python has always been an integral part of
Google. You can actually verify this statement by looking at the
Google Jobs page which lists Python knowledge as a requirement
for software engineers.
* Bruce Perens is a co-founder of OpenSource.org and the UserLinux
project.  UserLinux  aims  to  create a standardized Linux
distribution supported by multiple vendors. Python has beaten
contenders like Perl and Ruby to become the main programming
language that will be supported by UserLinux.

