Chapter 2. Installing Python
============================

For Linux/BSD users
-------------------

If you are using a Linux distribution such as Fedora or Mandrake or
{put your choice here}, or a BSD system such as FreeBSD, then you
probably already have Python installed on your system.

To test if you have Python already installed on your Linux box, open
a shell program (like konsole or gnome-terminal) and enter the
command python -V as shown below.

:: 

    $ python -V
    Python 2.3.4

Note
~~~~

$ is the prompt of the shell. It will be different for you depending
on the settings of your OS, hence I will indicate the prompt by just
the $ symbol.

If you see some version information like the one shown above, then
you have Python installed already.

However, if you get a message like this one::

    $ python -V
    bash: python: command not found

then, you don't have Python installed. This is highly unlikely but
possible.

In this case, you have two ways of installing Python on your system.

* Install  the  binary packages using the package management
  software that comes with your OS, such as yum in Fedora Linux,
  urpmi in Mandrake Linux, apt-get in Debian Linux, pkg_add in
  FreeBSD, etc. Note that you will need an internet connection to
  use this method.
  Alternatively, you can download the binaries from somewhere else
  and then copy to your PC and install it.
* You can compile Python from the source code and install it. The
  compilation instructions are provided at the website.

For Windows Users
-----------------

Visit Python.org/download and download the latest version from this
website (which was 2.3.4 as of this writing. This is just 9.4 MB
which  is  very  compact compared to most other languages. The
installation is just like any other Windows-based software.

Caution
~~~~~~~

When you are given the option of unchecking any optional components,
don't uncheck any! Some of these components can be useful for you,
especially IDLE.

An interesting fact is that about 70% of Python downloads are by
Windows users. Of course, this doesn't give the complete picture
since almost all Linux users will have Python installed already on
their systems by default.

Using Python in the Windows command line
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to be able to use Python from the Windows command line,
then you need to set the PATH variable appropriately.

For Windows 2000, XP, 2003 , click on Control Panel -> System ->
Advanced -> Environment Variables. Click on the variable named PATH
in  the  'System  Variables' section, then select Edit and add
;C:\Python23 (without the quotes) to the end of what is already
there. Of course, use the appropriate directory name.

For older versions of Windows, add the following line to the file
C:\AUTOEXEC.BAT : 'PATH=%PATH%;C:\Python23' (without the quotes) and
restart the system. For Windows NT, use the AUTOEXEC.NT file.

Summary
-------

For a Linux system, you most probably already have Python installed
on your system. Otherwise, you can install it using the package
management software that comes with your distribution. For a Windows
system, installing Python is as easy as downloading the installer
and double-clicking on it. From now on, we will assume that you have
Python installed on your system.

Next, we will write our first Python program.

