
Appendix B. About
=================


Colophon
--------

Almost all of the software that I have used in the creation of this
book are free and open source software. In the first draft of this
book, I had used Red Hat 9.0 Linux as the foundation of my setup and
now for this sixth draft, I am using Fedora Core 3 Linux as the
basis of my setup.

Initially, I was using KWord to write the book (as explained in the
History Lesson in the preface). Later, I switched to DocBook XML
using Kate but I found it too tedious. So, I switched to OpenOffice
which was just excellent with the level of control it provided for
formatting as well as the PDF generation, but it produced very
sloppy HTML from the document. Finally, I discovered XEmacs and I
rewrote the book from scratch in DocBook XML (again) after I decided
that this format was the long term solution. In this new sixth
draft, I decided to use Quanta+ to do all the editing.

The standard XSL stylesheets that came with Fedora Core 3 Linux are
being  used.  The standard default fonts are used as well. The
standard fonts are used as well. However, I have written a CSS
document to give color and style to the HTML pages. I have also
written  a  crude lexical analyzer, in Python of course, which
automatically  provides syntax highlighting to all the program
listings.

About the Author
----------------

Swaroop C H loves his job which is being a software developer at
Yahoo!  in the Bangalore office in India. His interests on the
technological side include FLOSS such as Linux, DotGNU, Qt and
MySQL, great languages like Python and C#, writing stuff like this
book and any software he can create in his spare time, as well as
writing his blog. His other interests include coffee, reading Robert
Ludlum novels, trekking and politics.

If you are still to interested to know more about this guy, check
out his blog at www.swaroopch.info .

