
Preface
=======

Python is probably one of the few programming languages which is
both simple and powerful. This is good for both and beginners as
well as experts, and more importantly, is fun to program with. This
book aims to help you learn this wonderful language and show how to
get things done quickly and painlessly - in effect 'The Perfect
Anti-venom to your programming problems'.

Who This Book Is For
--------------------

This book serves as a guide or tutorial to the Python programming
language.  It  is mainly targeted at newbies. It is useful for
experienced programmers as well.

The aim is that if all you know about computers is how to save text
files,  then  you can learn Python from this book. If you have
previous programming experience, then you can also learn Python from
this book.

If  you  do  have previous programming experience, you will be
interested in the differences between Python and your favorite
programming language - I have highlighted many such differences. A
little warning though, Python is soon going to become your favorite
programming language!

History Lesson
--------------

I first started with Python when I needed to write an installer for
my software Diamond so that I could make the installation easy. I
had to choose between Python and Perl bindings for the Qt library. I
did some research on the web and I came across an article where Eric
S. Raymond, the famous and respected hacker, talked about how Python
has become his favorite programming language. I also found out that
the PyQt bindings were very good compared to Perl-Qt. So, I decided
that Python was the language for me.

Then, I started searching for a good book on Python. I couldn't find
any!  I  did find some O'Reilly books but they were either too
expensive or were more like a reference manual than a guide. So, I
settled for the documentation that came with Python. However, it was
too brief and small. It did give a good idea about Python but was
not complete. I managed with it since I had previous programming
experience, but it was unsuitable for newbies.

About six months after my first brush with Python, I installed the
(then) latest Red Hat 9.0 Linux and I was playing around with KWord.
I got excited about it and suddenly got the idea of writing some
stuff on Python. I started writing a few pages but it quickly became
30 pages long. Then, I became serious about making it more useful in
a book form. After a lot of rewrites, it has reached a stage where
it has become a useful guide to learning the Python language. I
consider this book to be my contribution and tribute to the open
source community.

This book started out as my personal notes on Python and I still
consider it in the same way, although I've taken a lot of effort to
make it more palatable to others :)

In  the  true  spirit  of open source, I have received lots of
constructive suggestions, criticisms and feedback from enthusiastic
readers which has helped me improve this book a lot.

Status of the book
------------------

This book is a work-in-progress. Many chapters are constantly being
changed and improved. However, the book has matured a lot. You
should be able to learn Python easily from this book. Please do tell
me  if  you  find  any  part  of  the  book to be incorrect or
incomprehensible.

More chapters are planned for the future, such as on wxPython,
Twisted and maybe even Boa Constructor.

Official Website
----------------

The official website of the book is http://www.byteofpython.info . From the
website, you can read the whole book online or you can download the
latest versions of the book, and also send me feedback.

License Terms
-------------

This   book   is   licensed   under   the   Creative   Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike License 2.0 .

Basically, you are free to copy, distribute, and display the book,
as long as you give credit to me. The restrictions are that you
cannot use the book for commercial purposes without my permission.
You are free to modify and build upon this work, provided that you
clearly mark all changes and release the modified work under the
same license as this book.

Please visit the Creative Commons website for the full and exact
text of the license, or for an easy-to-understand version. There is
even a comic strip explaining the terms of the license.

Feedback
--------

I have put in a lot of effort to make this book as interesting and
as accurate as possible. However, if you find some material to be
inconsistent or incorrect, or simply needs improvement, then please
do inform me, so that I can make suitable improvements. You can
reach me at <swaroop@byteofpython.info> .

Something To Think About
------------------------

    There are two ways of constructing a software design: one way is
    to make it so simple that there are obviously no deficiencies; the
    other is to make it so complicated that there are no obvious
    deficiencies.
    --C. A. R. Hoare

    Success in life is a matter not so much of talent and opportunity
    as of concentration and perseverance.
    --C. W. Wendte
